about dyson spheres
now some of you may know what these are
and others not
but the basic idea is
that an advanced civilization might
build a great big
spherical structure around
and completely swallow their own star
in order to capture all of the
heat and light energy coming from the
star to use it for their own purposes
um and this uh we'll look at how much
energy you would get by doing that
and the feasibility of it and whether or
not we might detect such things as a way
of locating advanced alien
civilizations
so let's just start by looking at the
energy demands that uh
we have here on earth and i thought we'd
look at it just from the point of view
of the graph i'm not making any
political points here or talking about
global warming or any of that i'm just
saying look what's happened
since
our invention of technology to our
demand for a total energy budget for the
world to drive that technology
it's gone in a very much an exponential
rise
we're familiar with those at the moment
aren't we we start with a small rise but
each small improvement leads to a
further acceleration
and so the
amount of energy that is now being
consumed by the world is out of all
proportion to where it was just a couple
of hundred years ago
it really makes no no comparison at all
and of course one really important
aspect of all of this which is beginning
to take hold at the moment
is that we're getting
ever increasing amount of energy by
capturing the power of the sun using
solar panels you're seeing them more and
more on the roofs of houses and great
fields full of them
so i thought i'd just have a look at uh
exactly sort of some of the numbers that
go along with solar power
as it's key to our understanding of the
topic for today
i thought i'd ask myself the question
and i'm i'm sorry there's a little bit
of maths here
what some area of solar panels would you
need to power the whole of the uk it's a
very good question it was posed in a a
book that i read a few years ago when i
was working on this sort of subject
and
it turns out that the uk in 2019 used
just over 1600 terawatt hours
of electricity
some very big numbers involved here
um
and so if we convert that from terawatt
hours into fuels we get
the number there
uh 5.9 so we can call it six
times 10 to the power 18 joules of
energy in one
year and if we divide it out from energy
to power
by dividing by the number of seconds
in a year which is 31.5 million
we get 188.5
gigawatts of power that we need to
provide
uh in order to run the uk
um that's that's a lot of electricity
but how do we relate that to the uh
solar panels well i've got some solar
panels here
and
in very rough figures each of my panels
produces about 200 watts
for each square meter of panel on a very
sunny day
now i'm going to round that down for
convenience and call it 188.5
for reasons that will become obvious
because i'm just about to divide 188.5
times 10 to the 9 by it
so if i use 188.5 it all cancels out and
i get 1 billion square meters of
solar panels that's a thousand square
kilometers or roughly 260 square miles
of
land area or roof area that would need
to be covered in solar panels
which is quite a lot but it's not so
much that you couldn't conceive of
building it
except of course
we live in britain
as astronomers we know it's not we don't
have clear skies all the time
it's dark half the time it's only really
sunny about
for about a quarter of any given day
and
if the clouds roll in that rules out
another great chunk of the total energy
budget so you need to probably multiply
the number i had there previously by 10
in terms of overall capacity
just to deal with the fact that uh we
don't have the uh
right conditions all the time and of
course you have to find some way of
storing the power overnight and
releasing it during the daytime and all
sorts of problems
so of course being good space scientists
and astronomers
what we do is we say right let's put the
solar panels in space we'll get them
above the clouds
and we'll get them actually in fact
sufficiently far away from the earth
that they can orbit around it and not
end up in the earth's shadow if we put
them in a suitably inclined orbit
then
they will
happily
uh orbit around the earth and collect
their power unimpeded 100 of the time
so that's a that's a major improvement
you need roughly 10 times
then if you uh put them on the ground
for the reasons discussed of bad weather
and night
mostly
uh but it still means you need that
billion
square meter
array of solar panels to
power the uk
and that's a lot of solar panels to lift
into orbit
secondly you need to get the power back
from your orbiting spacecraft there's
some sort of magic light beam going on
here in this artist's illustration this
is perhaps more like it you would
collect it
concentrate it into some ferocious laser
beam and send it back to a much more
modest smaller collecting area
and the only problem with this of course
is
that it's the plot of diamonds are
forever and goldeneye and other james
bond
things to put a satellite with an
enormous laser up into space and point
it down at the ground
for nefarious purposes and so people are
somewhat
concerned that uh such a thing would
make it a much better weapon than it
would a power source
and what if you built such things and
then they got taken over by unscrupulous
hackers or something that
hack into the control system
this would be very bad indeed
so uh
it's possible but there are downsides to
it
okay well we talked about what sir we
needed to power the uk
it turns out that to do the whole of the
world
well the uk uses about one percent of
the
electricity budget of the whole world
and we're talking very rough numbers
here so we would need
a hundred times that area so a hundred
billion solar panels
uh of a meter square would would do it
and a hundred billion that's uh well
that's one for every star in the galaxy
or ten for every person on earth in very
round numbers
and you could see that if you had 10
solar panels on
everybody's roof
then that maybe that would work out
um of course i've completely ignored the
fact that we don't get all of our energy
from uh just electricity a lot of it's
coming from petrol gas
coal and other things that directly
power transport and heat and so forth so
you know the total energy budget for the
entire civilization is a bit more than
i've estimated but
only within
the same factor of 10 and we're all
friends here so a factor of 10 is good
enough
but
the sun puts out
a
vast amount of energy only a tiny
fraction of it comes our way
and is available for us to capture here
on earth
and it goes back to about 1937 and this
guy olaf stabledon who
wrote in a novel about the idea of an
advanced civilization
capturing their star building a complete
shell of solar panels around it to
capture the entire energy budget
coming from the star and turn it into
usable power for that civilization who
could then do all sorts of amazing
things with this nearly unlimited source
of power
now that very much got ignored um for a
few years until it was picked up by
someone who is much more famous in
science circles and that's freeman dyson
who sadly passed away in february last
year
and he wrote a paper which was
peer-reviewed and published in the
science journal in 1960
called the search for artificial stellar
sources of infrared radiation
and what he really meant was
the search for these sorts of spheres he
he was
realized that
a civilization that was capturing vast
amounts of
energy from some source like a star
would end up converting that energy from
effectively the high temperature that it
comes to them as
um and leaking it away as low
grade heat and so they would have quite
a strong
waste heat signature in the infrared
part of the civil
of their the spectrum and therefore we
might go and search for these uh the
waste heat of advanced civilizations
and he referred to the waste heat from
their biosphere
which people then rather misinterpreted
in the light of um
the ideas of stableton that uh dyson was
talking about building a proper sphere
around
a hole of a star he was actually really
talking about
biosphere in the terms of ecosystem as
we might say today
but
nevertheless
much to his chagrin these things have
become known as dyson spheres as a
result of this
and the the idea in the name really took
off
uh basically
the question we therefore want to answer
is what if we built a full sphere to
capture all of the light output
from our sun with solar panels
and uh tried to make use of that and i'm
just going to sort of take you through a
couple of numbers on this
because we can do some maths we've got
the sun in the middle giving out a total
power output
which i'll tell you is is this number
here in watts 3.8 times 10 to the 26 so
that's a very big number indeed
and we can work out given the uh
that the earth is
um
150 million kilometers away from the sun
that's 1.5 times 10 to the 11 meters
and the formula for the area of a
sphere is 4 pi r squared so plug that
number in as r here and i get 2.8 times
10 to the 23 square meters as the area
of this um this sphere
those are big numbers but we shouldn't
be frightened of them we can just divide
out 3.8 over 2.8 and take the difference
in the powers which is just three
um 3.8 over 2.8 times a thousand is 1
350 watts for every square meter
so for every every square meter of this
dyson sphere there's uh
1300 watts available
now we talked about our our existing
solar panels giving out around about 200
watts for each square meter
and that's about right because
our solar panels are only about 20
percent efficient
um and of course the atmosphere blocks
some of the uh energy coming down to the
ground so only about a thousand watts
makes it to the surface of the earth
and our panels capture about
20 percent of it
so those numbers do all stack up
but now you can work out something
rather interesting about this dyson
sphere it's got this source of energy in
the center of the sun which is radiating
away its surface is at
just under 6000 degrees kelvin
and
the dyson sphere is catching all of that
energy
and we can ask ourselves
how hot would it get
there's a very handy formula called the
stefan boltzmann law which is that the
uh
power is a constant called the stefan
boltzmann constant which i've given the
letter o to
times the fourth power of the
temperature
so it's a simple calculation
we can plug in the value of the constant
and we can plug in 1350 for the power
per square meter
and work out the temperature that we
would get
for the radiation coming out as infrared
radiation after it had penetrated the
sphere
high energy
radiation from the sun into low grade
energy coming from a much larger sphere
is really all that we're doing here and
if i plumb all those numbers in
daddy daddy down here
we get a temperature of
392 kelvin
which is 119 degrees c and is a bit
toasty
you wouldn't want to try and live on a
dyson sphere built at the radius of the
earth's orbit and that's probably a bit
of a surprise because people actually
often assume that because the dyson
sphere is at the same distance
as the earth is from the sun it would be
at the same temperature
but that's not right and i'll show you
why it's not right
in fact you'd be you know you'd be
boiling a cup of tea on the outside of
here quite comfortably and you'd have to
live further away from it
in order to be at a more reasonable
temperature
so why is this not giving us uh
sort of a more earthly ambient
temperature well
it's not because it's wrong it's because
actually
when the radiation comes from the sun
and strikes the earth
it strikes one side of the earth
in fact
the earth is blocking a circle
of
radius
r which is
uh
371 kilometers the radius of the earth
um and so pi r squared again we can work
out the area of
um the disk of the earth as seen from
the sun
um and multiplied by that number of 1350
watts per square meter
and we we do that here blah blah and we
get this big number of total watts
and if i plug that into
the um
stefan boltzmann formula i could work it
all out but a simpler way of looking at
it is that
actually what hap then happens is that
the earth
then radiates the
energy out
from
the whole surface area of the sphere
so particularly the
hot spot directly under the sun right in
the middle here picks up lots of heat
and then the earth turns round and it's
going to radiate it from the far side
so although we're catching
an area of pi r squared
the whole surface of the the sphere is
radiating it away equally after the
atmosphere and the oceans have spread is
around
and um
that
corresponds to four pi r squared for the
formula for the
area of
a surface area of a sphere
so the surface area of the sphere is
exactly four times the surface area of
the disk that the sun sees
and so in fact
uh the
area that's doing the radiating is four
times as much as the area that's doing
the catching
that's a very simple way of doing it so
we can plug in a factor of a quarter
into our calculations
and we the quarter goes in there into
the same numbers and we get
277.7 degrees kelvin which is just 4.7
degrees c
and that's a much closer match actually
to the average temperature across the
whole of the earth
showing that this really does work as a
way of
working out what your uh your
temperature is
in fact of course things get more
complicated because we're not
catering for
all of the different factors
the reflectivity of the clouds versus
the oceans versus ice all of these
things play a a small part and of course
the greenhouse effect of
the
carbon dioxide and the water in our
atmosphere not letting the infrared to
radiate to space freely has an effect as
well and changes the the balance of
things
um
but one important thing that i thought i
would just mention at this point is if
an alien civilization was looking for
uh earth and looking to see whether or
not um there was uh anything interesting
about it
it could look at its spectrum and
see the light coming from the earth and
it would see some rather curious things
rather than
a
uniform temperature of around 300
degrees kelvin 277 whatever number you
choose to uh to to come up with
um
it would uh have some quite strange
features uh because a lot of the
vegetation on the earth absorbs the red
and the blue light
and
reflects only the green and the infrared
and so the forests of the earth
give the
spectrum of the earth quite a an
interesting um feature
you can see it here this is all part of
the infrared spectrum
from about 0.8
down and the visible spectrum is this
little bit here
you can see this is the blue being
absorbed by plants the green is rejected
and then the red is absorbed and then
further on down here we get different
absorptions by um
water and in fact we use this when
studying the earth with earth orbiting
satellites to work out what where crops
are growing and you can even tell the
difference between the crops because
different ones have different
shapes and ratios for their absorption
spectrum so
if we can study it so could uh an alien
anyway
so we've worked out that uh the that's
why the earth isn't at 119 degrees
centigrade is because it's uh
playing the trick of catching
the light and radiating it over four
times the area but the dyson sphere
can't do that the the surface area of
the sphere is
the catcher and the radiator
and i just wanted to
point out
the ratio of the surface area of the
earth to that of the dyson sphere
and it's tiny of course the earth you'd
need 2 billion earths to have the same
area that we would be dealing with so
the dyson sphere is going to catch 2
billion times the amount of energy
and so that would certainly solve your
civilization's energy budget for quite
some time to come
a factor of 2 billion times the total
available solar energy of the earth
but is this whole thing completely mad
is it is it actually feasible
and to
answer that you need to look at a few
sort of engineering type questions
just how much material would you need to
build a sphere that big
what would you build it out of would it
be strong enough to hold itself together
and what would it do to gravity
uh to have that much material in a giant
sphere like that
and some of these are quite easy
questions to tackle
the first one how much mass
because
we already worked out the surface area
and we could just say well let's make it
one meter thick
um
and so we can actually just multiply by
one and get the volume that's a very
straightforward approximation and
if we assumed that it was made of
material
with the same average density of the
earth we can multiply that out and get a
mass which works out to 1500
times 10 to the 24 kilograms
absolutely enormous
how much is that well the total mass of
the earth is 6
x 10 to the 24 kilograms
so you'd have to completely destroy the
earth um in fact you'd have to take 250
planet earths
and completely use that up all of their
mass in order to build one of these
things
uh i suggest that's probably
uh making the point that this is
completely ridiculous idea actually
you might argue you could make it
thinner than a meter
in which case you know it wouldn't be
very strong i don't suppose even a meter
is pushing your luck i think
but even if you decided to make it only
one millimeter thick uh you need
something the mass of a quarter of the
uh the mass of the earth
um so you'd have to destroy mars or
something like that to build it
um and if it was going to be even
thinner than that well then maybe a
large asteroid would do the job but
i can't see us making anything thinner
than uh than really
a meter or so and having it have any
strength at all i mean it's got to put
up with being hit by the occasional
asteroid uh it's got all sorts of
interesting problems to do with the
gravity of jupiter pulling on it and
trying to warp it and distort it
maybe we should take jupiter apart and
use that you know
still not enough really
um the other problem is would it hold
together and the answer to that is no
no known material would have enough
strength to resist the crushing
stress that such a sphere would be under
due to the gravity of the sun pulling
inwards on it um and the slightest
inward deformation would suddenly tear
the whole thing apart um and so yes that
that
gravity of jupiter warping it would be a
real disaster um i think it's just uh
orders of thousands of times stronger
that we would need to make it if we uh
pursued the mathematics on that
what about the effect on gravity well
newton showed something rather
interesting which is that inside a
hollow shell of material
the uh gravity of the material that
makes up the shell
all cancels out if you think about it
you're right at the center where one of
those red dots is
you're equidistant from all of the
material in the shell and so the gravity
of each atom of the shell is pulling
towards it on you
and they're equal in every possible
direction and so there is no net force
now you might think that that the other
positions marked that that would be out
of balance but uh newton showed and we
could look at the maths but i'm not
going to but um
at every possible position inside the
shell it still cancels out because
you might be near to some of this mass
but you're now much further away from
a larger amount of the mass and it
exactly cancels out
um there's a tour de force by newton in
using his maths to show that and so
there's no net gravity at all
inside the sphere
and this is a problem because
it um
would lead to
the sun
being free to wander around there would
be nothing keeping the sun
stable in the center
and so if if there were any sort of
gravitational nudges going on from uh
jupiter or whatever that would nudge the
sphere they wouldn't be transmitted
through to nudging the um
the sun and it would wander off and
eventually collide with the outside of
the sphere and that would make a
terrible mess
um and if your solution to this is to
put some sort of magic thrusters on the
sphere to keep it
centered with the sun in the middle
bear in mind you're trying to shift
something that has 250 times the mass of
the earth
so trying to move it around needs an
enormous amount of power
you often also see diagrams like this
in the in connection with um
dyson spheres where
people have migrated from the earth and
allow living on a city on the outside of
the sphere
but i think i've already shown that
you'd have to build the sphere a bit
bigger you'd have to build it with a
greater diameter in order that the
surface temperature wasn't above boiling
point
and move it out a bit and we could work
out just how much further out from the
sun you'd have to go for that to happen
wouldn't be wouldn't be that far
actually it's uh it's a small adjustment
um
it's uh
also interesting though that the
surface gravity of
such a city built on the outside of a
dyson sphere would be a bit of a problem
because
the um
gravity of the sphere itself if you work
that out
ignoring the sun in the center
you can work out the mass to be 250
times the mass of the earth
and it would act downwards on you
and again newton showed that if you're
outside the sphere
you can model it perfectly as if all
that mass is concentrated at the center
and so the force pulling you down would
be as if someone had put 250 earth
masses 150 million kilometers away from
you
and uh any of our
uh young astronomers can soon do the
calculation with uh newton's formula for
gravity and show that you'd actually
have a very tiny amount of gravity um
pulling you down onto the earth
in fact with the sun in the center the
sun would be the dominant
uh feature there because it would dwarf
the 250 earth masses
it's about uh 300 000 earth masses so
you would be
suddenly really subject to the solar
gravity pulling inwards
and that would be about 1 20th of the
gravity that we feel whilst wandering
around on the surface of the earth
so um these sorts of cities would um
certainly not be somewhere where you
would be growing trees like this
uh you'd have a real problem holding on
to an atmosphere for a start
so what is the solution
perhaps
rather than a full sphere which would
catch 200 times sorry 2 billion times
the
energy budget of the whole of the earth
or a trillion times the current earth
requirement for energy perhaps that's
overkill and perhaps we should
aim for something a bit more modest what
about a ring around the uh
the sun
perhaps slightly further out than the
earth's orbit
that would be a much more practical
proposition or some sort of um
polyhedral arrangement
to try and get some rigidity into the
system maybe that would be more
plausible um as shown in the artist's
impression here where they've gone for a
sort of triangular grid
making up an approximate sphere
and some of those solutions are a lot
more plausible than capturing the whole
of the energy of the star you would only
catch a fraction of it but it'd still be
a very very useful amount to uh
any sort of advanced civilization so
these sorts of things are a bit more
plausible
even more plausible though is just not
to bother making it a rigid structure
and to
put lots and lots of
uh solar panel satellites in orbit and
the reason for this is you can start
with one
and you can just keep adding them and
building up you don't have to
build the whole ring or the whole
structure to make it stable
so you could surround your star in
enormous numbers of solar panels
provided you could
beam the energy back somehow but
actually nasa have already done an
experiment
like this of putting a
giant solar panel in space and beaming
the energy back to the earth
and that does work
um it has the james bond death ray
problem that i mentioned earlier but
and of course it might go wrong if even
if it wasn't
deliberately misaimed it might uh wander
off track
and uh fry some parts of the earth that
you cared about but uh
and and with
tens of millions of these up there
probability of one of them running amok
like that starts to get quite high
so you'd have to have a lot of
safeguards built in
so
given that these sorts of partial
structures either orbiting or rigid
um are a bit more plausible
could we find anything like this what
what would uh the what would it look
like from our point of view
and this all came to the fore in uh
about five years ago in 2016 with the uh
discovery of tabby's star
as part of the kepler space telescope's
planet hunters mission the citizen
science project
uh a number of amateur astronomers
spotted a star in the kepler data that
showed a very strange
uh curve in its brightness
it was suddenly dimming and then coming
back to full brightness in a very very
erratic way
what of course the program was really
looking for was the regular dips caused
by a planet
crossing the line of sight
and
blocking
a fixed proportion of their starlight
while it did it on a regular basis
and i used some of the data and i found
a planet
that's back back in
2012 i think it was um that did
precisely that every 397 days and you've
got a very regular dip in the in the
light curve but this particular star
um has a absolutely wild
light curve
with
the uh dimming going down to taking it
down to 20 or more of the light of the
star being blocked now the planet that i
found was a neptune-sized planet and it
blocked 0.3
of the starlight the stars are really
rather large compared to planets so
something blocking 20 or more percent of
the light has to be very big indeed
now uh this uh
star was then studied by an astronomer
out in the us called tabitha beau yeah
and
uh we now call it tabby's star because
her surname's so hard to pronounce
there's the light curve for it
which looks like nothing we'd ever seen
before
with these enormous dips going down so i
said
an individual dip
like this one here might correspond to a
planet
but
it's got these weird side dips and it
doesn't uh
look like anything at all
and some very broad dips and some that
go very deep indeed and it keeps on
doing this it keeps on producing these
erratic patterns
that no one's able to see any sort of uh
repeating structure to
and so
the idea
was suggested that maybe this was a
partial dyson sphere perhaps under
construction um the star is a an f-type
star a little bit hotter than our sun
burning a little bit more brightly and
perhaps there's you know an alien race
there deciding to
take the next step and start to build a
mega structure to capture a lot of that
starlight and use it
for their own purposes
and perhaps what we're seeing is
partially constructed arrays of solar
panels passing in front of the star
and blocking really rather large
proportions of the light as they sweep
past
well
maybe that's the case
in fact we've been searching since
dyson's paper in the 1960s
for dyson spheres looking to see if we
could detect full ones even though we
thought that they were probably
impossible to build because who knows
ancient people built the pyramids and we
still haven't quite explained that
um and so the question really is what
would these things look like is tabby's
star
a representative case of what we would
expect to see
well a full dyson sphere you wouldn't
see the star at all
and all of the stars high energy light
would have been converted into
heat radiation
and to understand that we have to look
at uh what
heat radiation looks like
very much uh you get a curve
a slightly skewed distribution curve
like this
long tail into the infrared and a peak
and then a maximum cut-off point
and these curves
are
characteristic of an object at a given
temperature so if you find the peak of
uh
like this tallest graph has a peak at 7
000 kelvin that will be
in the visible part of the spectrum and
will be a blue
white colored star
with the light coming out here the sun
is down here where it's giving out uh
middle range wavelengths in this sort of
green and early blue
and red dwarf stars
they're red because the only visible
light you get is really this last little
bit here because they're at about 3000
degrees
but you always get this same shape curve
it's just that the height of the peak
declines with temperature and the
position of the peak moves to the right
on the graph as you cool the object down
so if you see a curve like this you can
easily work out the temperature
um
so there it is again for the the sun
uh with its
light curve
and here's the one for the earth
that's
obviously much
lower amount of heat that you get coming
off the earth
but the maximum is at 288 degrees kelvin
which is actually the the average
temperature of the earth and that's
where this peak is here
i discussed earlier that
if you looked at that in great detail
you would see
differences caused by things like the
forests with them absorbing some of the
light
in the green and
some of the infrared light as well
so
if you look to the partial
um for a full sorry a full dyson sphere
you would simply see
the
all of the energy of its star
coming out
as infrared energy at around 3000 sorry
300 degrees kelvin so
you'd get a an infrared light curve
which would have a peak corresponding to
the wavelength for 300 degrees kelvin
and
the odd thing about it would be it would
be very very bright it would be a
billion times brighter than the
heat output from the earth because the
total star energy is trying to come out
from this object
so it would be a very very bright
infrared source and of course back in
the 60s when freeman dyson suggested
these things be searched for we didn't
have infrared telescopes above the
atmosphere able to look for these sorts
of things
we do now have some very good ones
and indeed the james webb space
telescope that is in the process of
deployment deployments
so far so good it's seemingly all going
well last time i looked
it's going to have great capability at
looking at infrared objects and so this
is a candidate for things we might go
and look for
um it wouldn't look really like anything
much else james webb would be able to
tell the difference between for example
a dust ring around a star and a dyson
sphere
and the reason is because the
dust ring is going to block some
wavelengths of light completely and not
others
the longer wavelength light will just go
straight through the dust and not be
absorbed by it but a solid dyson sphere
is going to
block all of that
and so you'd get a perfect black body
curve in the spectrum
but partial swarms much more complicated
because the starlight is still going to
get through
and you would see that
you would also see the heat signature
coming from the warmed up bits of
the
orbiting satellites
or the fragments of the partial sphere
and so you would see two peaks one from
the star and one from the
material of the dyson sphere itself down
in the infrared and that's actually what
we could go and look for with the james
webb telescope looking at these uh
light curves to see if we can see that
excess infrared pump in the spectrum
that
is indicative of
something capturing energy from the star
and dumping it as waste heat
so that's really what we we would like
to go and look for with it
now the gaia space telescope's been up
there for a few years now and has been
measuring a billion stars looking at
their brightness their distance
and their color and their color of
course tells us their temperature by
that black body relationship
and this is just also just the right
data to go and study what's going on out
there and see if we can spot any partial
dyson spheres
and the way you would do it
is to plot out
the
hertz sprung russell diagram so
brightness going up
here and
temperature or color going across the
bottom
here so these down here would be the
cool red dwarf stars the sun like stars
in the middle and the hot blue stars in
the top left
and this is the data for gaia from
that
all plotted on one chart
and what we would see for a partial
dyson sphere is a star that was not on
that diagonal line the main sequence
because
the
stars
some of the stars light energy would be
being trapped
and re-radiated off the chart as
infrared and so we would see stars that
were
somewhat below
the
diagonal line of the main sequence of
ordinary stars
that were just sitting there below that
line
and
having a
temperature that doesn't properly
correspond to their brightness and look
here they are one two three
four
five
six seven eight nine
ten ten candidates
down here
that are off the beaten track all of
these are proper
ordinary stars
they vary slightly because of things
like how uh what proportion of
the heavier elements they have in them
which is what is making that line
broader than just a single line
plus the fact that it's the combined
uh
traces from not only the milky way but
some of the um
dwarf galaxies that the milky way has
eaten but there are certainly a few
candidate stars down here that are
below the line they're
not giving out as much light as their
temperature would suggest so these are
candidates for
uh alien megastructure interference or
partial dyson spheres as we would call
it
these ones over here these are white
dwarfs we know we understand them we
don't need to worry about them they're
the remains of dead stars and uh what's
going on here is these are all the red
giants being formed as stars run out of
their ordinary um
uh
ability to make hydrogen into helium by
nuclear fusion and the reason there's
several
fin traces in there again is because the
milky way has eaten smaller galaxies in
the past and so we've got a number of
different populations and different ages
of stars all overlaid there
so
what we could do is look at these stars
these 10 here that have fallen below the
main sequence
with an infrared telescope and see if
they
are producing an excess in the
infrared that matches the amount of
missing energy
that would have put them back onto the
main sequence
we haven't found that that is the case
yet
but it's actually a very difficult
measurement to do in the infrared and
again the james webb space telescope is
going to target some of these and
that's one of the things that we might
learn about as we
get the thing working
of course if they're not
dyson spheres then it
begs the other interesting question
what are they
what are these weird stars that are
misbehaving not sitting on the main
sequence
and
being
either too hot for their brightness or
too bright for their temperature
depending on your point of view are not
bright enough for their temperature
depending on your point of view
why are they dimmer than their
temperature suggests
and
what's going on with them so they're
very interesting to try and understand
any in any event even if it's not aliens
so i said james webb will go and look at
these and get will get turned to them at
some point
and hopefully that won't be too far away
now
again i think james webb is also going
to have another look at tabby's star but
the latest results on this are that i'm
afraid we're not in the
top picture situation but it's more
likely that we're in the bottom
situation with
a whole host of a swarm of comets
that are
orbiting around the main star with very
long thick tails that
are blocking the starlight and it's
those commentary tales
that are responsible for the dimming of
the starlight in the very erratic manner
um
the reason we believe this is that
we've looked at the dimming in different
wavelengths now
and
the dimming in the visible part of the
spectrum
uh is different to that in the
ultraviolet and in the infrared and in
particular
the uh it's much less apparent in the
infrared
and the infrared tends to go straight
through dust clouds so it's likely that
this these are the effects of dust
that are blocking the starlight
but they're not blocking the heat
radiation the infrared
um and so afraid tabby's star looks less
likely to be a dyson sphere
and another factor about it that's
recently been discovered is it has a
binary companion in the form of a red
dwarf star
uh orbiting around quite a long way away
au
that's uh
a lot further out than neptune which is
30 au from our star
so
it's really quite a big orbit
but it could be that this little red
dwarf companion is disrupting uh the
stars
cloud the cloud of leftover icy material
the uh that is turning in the these uh
items of the oort cloud into
comets plummeting into the inner solar
system
perhaps in a situation similar to
happened in
our solar system with the late heavy
bombardment
that might have been responsible for
delivering a lot of the water to the
earth
with all these dirty snowboards coming
into the inner part of the solar system
in our case it was an interaction
between jupiter and saturn that caused
that but here it might be this uh binary
star that is perhaps
hurling comets into the inner
reaches of the solar system of tabby's
star and causing all this excitement
here on earth
uh when we uh thought we might have
discovered evidence of aliens
um so i'm afraid
i'm going to bring the talk to an end
there and just say it's never aliens
until it's proved to be aliens
and in this case it wasn't
um so better luck next time